---

layout: default
page_site: Paris
page_id: 100
---

### Geometry of Polynomial System Solving, Optimization and Topology

**Organizers:**  [C. D'Andrea](http://www.ub.edu/arcades/cdandrea.html), {{site.safey}}, {{site.schost}}, [L. Zhi](http://www.mmrc.iss.ac.cn/~lzhi/) 

Polynomial systems encode a wide range of non-linear (but static) phenomena which arise in many 
applications. Non-linearity makes them non-trivial to handle, both from complexity and reliability viewpoints. 
Still, because of their importance for key applications e.g. in mechanism design and optimization amongst many others, 
various algorithmic approaches have been developed.
During the last decades, tremendous achievements have been accomplished to design faster algorithms for polynomial system 
solving, extend their capabilities to tackle topological issues and understand their complexities. For instance, 
let us mention new families of algorithms to exploit algebraic and geometric properties of polynomial systems 
and their solution sets such as sparsity or weighted and multi-homogeneity, algorithms for understanding the topology of 
semi-algebraic sets (Betti numbers, connectivity queries), the raise of sums-of-squares certificates to certify emptiness over the reals of polynomial systems through symbolic-numeric approaches, and last but not least, 
the stellar solution to 17th Smale problem by Lairez following previous works from Beltrán, Cucker and Pardo.  

Many challenges remain to be addressed to pave the way towards high performance polynomial system solvers 
tackling large scale applications. Topical issues lie in the combination of efficiency and certification, computing 
exact certificates of emptiness, understanding the geometry of polynomial systems and their solution sets to exploit 
better their properties algorithmically. This workshop will cover broadly all these 
topics.
